[Lens] Page for Metric charts (#3645)
elastic/docs-content: explore-analyze/visualize/charts/metric-charts.md

    * Related metrics for context (for example, showing total count alongside an average)

    :::{include} ../_snippets/lens-value-advanced-settings.md
    :::

**Appearance**
:   Define the formatting of the secondary metric, including:
    - **Name**: By default, the chart uses the function or formula as title. It's a best practice to customize this with a readable title.
    - **Value format**: Choose to display the metric as number, percent, bytes, bits, duration, or with a custom format that you can define.
    - **Label**: Define the label displayed next to the secondary metric. By default, the **Name** shows. You can instead show a **Custom** value or hide it by selecting **None**.
    - **Label position**: Choose to show the label **Before** or **After** the metric.
    - **Color by value**: Apply colors to the chart. Choose between **None**, **Static** for a unique color and **Dynamic** for using different colors based on the metric's value. This option allows you to use the secondary metric as a comparison point to highlight trends. Refer to [](#metric-trends) for more details.

> ### Maximum value settings [max-value-options]

Author: We shouldn't add a screenshot here because it's a pure setting reference, but what we can do instead and that could be of higher value is to add an "advanced scenario" similar to what we do for trends, with screenshots. I'll make a note of it and work on it

---
navigation_title: Metric charts
applies_to:
  stack: ga
  serverless: ga
description: Instructions and best practices for building metric charts with Kibana Lens in Elastic.
---

# Build metric charts with {{kib}}

Metric charts make important single values stand out on a dashboard. They're perfect for highlighting KPIs such as error rates or SLOs for example, and for making them understandable at a glance with dynamic coloring or trend indicators.

> They work with any numeric data: plain numbers, percentages, or calculations like a count, sum, or average. You can get this numeric data from numeric fields stored in your {{es}} documents, or from aggregation functions and formulas that you can apply to any type of field.

Reviewer: A pratical example can be: show the last failing service in the current time frame, or the last error message, or the last failing server name/ip

<img width="204" height="171" alt="Screenshot 2025-11-19 at 12 27 42" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f659d6ab-02e0-463a-b752-4c94ce216267" />

> The best way to create metric charts in {{kib}} is with **Lens**.

Reviewer: Let's say first and only! We don't want to promote any other metric charts like the one available in TSVB, so this is the only way to create metric charts in kibana.

    ::::

3. In the secondary metric configuration, look for the **Color by value** option. The possible choices are:
   * **None**: No trend indicators (default)
   * **Static**: Shows the secondary metric as a badge with a single color that you select
   * **Dynamic**: Enables both color coding and directional icons based on the comparison

4. Select **Dynamic** coloring. More options appear.

   ![Dynamic coloring options for secondary metrics](../../images/metric-secondary-dynamic-coloring.png "=70%")

5. Choose a **Color palette** that matches how you'd like to represent the comparison.

6. Configure the **Display** option:
   * **Icon**: Shows only directional arrows: ↑ for increase, ↓ for decrease, = for no change
   * **Value**: Shows only the secondary metric value
   * **Both**: Shows both the icon and value (default)

7. The secondary metric does not automatically compare with the primary metric. Define the value to **Compare to**:
   * **Static value**: Compares against a fixed baseline value that you specify

>    * **Primary metric**: Compares the secondary metric directly against the primary metric. This option is only available when the primary metric is numeric. 

Reviewer: Can we specify, as in the UI description that it shows the current difference: primary - secondary?

   2. Set **Type** to **Bar**.
   3. Optionally, change the orientation of the progress bar as needed.

5. Apply your changes.

The metric visualization now shows a progress bar indicating how close the current value is to the maximum.

::::{tip}
You can combine progress bars with secondary metrics to show both progress toward a goal and trends over time. To do this, add both a maximum value and a secondary metric to your visualization.
::::

## Metric chart settings [settings]

Customize your metric chart to display exactly the information you need, formatted the way you want.

### Primary metric settings [primary-metric-options]

**Value**
:   The main numeric value that appears prominently in your chart. When you drag a field onto the chart, {{kib}} suggests a function based on the field type. You can change it and use aggregation functions like `Sum`, `Average`, `Count`, `Median`, and more, or create custom calculations with formulas. Refer to [](/explore-analyze/visualize/lens.md#lens-formulas) for examples, or to the {icon}`documentation` **Formula reference** available from Lens.

    :::{include} ../../_snippets/lens-value-advanced-settings.md
    :::

> 

Author: Yes it helps make the page a little bit more digestible and shifts the emphasis to the most important ones. Thanks for the feedback!

---
navigation_title: Metric charts
applies_to:
  stack: ga
  serverless: ga
description: Instructions and best practices for building metric charts with Kibana Lens in Elastic.
---

# Build metric charts with {{kib}}

Metric charts make important single values stand out on a dashboard. They're perfect for highlighting KPIs such as error rates or SLOs for example, and for making them understandable at a glance with dynamic coloring or trend indicators.

They work with any numeric data: plain numbers, percentages, or calculations like a count, sum, or average. You can get this numeric data from numeric fields stored in your {{es}} documents, or from aggregation functions and formulas that you can apply to any type of field. <br>
You can also display strings by using the `Last value` aggregation function that picks up the last document, sorted by timestamp, in the current tine frame.

> To create metric charts in {{kib}}, you must use **Lens**.

Reviewer 2: Could be useful to link to the Lens page here, in case users need a quick definition. 

```suggestion
To create metric charts in {{kib}}, you must use [**Lens**](../lens.md)
```

- By creating a visualization from the **Visualize library** page.
::::

::::{step} Set the visualization to Metric
New visualizations default to creating **Bar** charts. 

Using the dropdown indicating **Bar**, select **Metric**.
::::

::::{step} Define the data to show
1. Select the {{data-source}} that contains your data.
2. Define the **Primary metric** by dragging a field from the fields list to the chart. {{kib}} automatically selects an appropriate aggregation function like Sum, Average, or Count based on the field type. This is the only setting that your metric chart requires to display something.
3. Optionally:
    - Add a [secondary metric](#secondary-metric-options). You can use this secondary metric as a comparison value or as a trend indicator to show how the primary metric evolves over time.
    - Specify a [maximum value](#max-value-options).
    - [Break down](#breakdown-options) the metric into multiple tiles based on another dimension. 

Refer to [](#settings) to find all data configuration options for your metric chart.
::::

> ::::{step} Customize the chart with best practices

Reviewer 2: "With" always feels more appropriate to convey action or a relationship.

```suggestion
::::{step} Customize the chart to follow best practices
```

Tweak the appearance of the chart to your needs. Consider the following best practices:

**Use color wisely**

> :   Assign colors that match your users' expectations and consider your specific context: for costs, lower might be better, while for revenue, higher is better.

Author: ```suggestion
:   Assign colors that match your users' expectations and consider your specific context.
```
I'm just going to remove this part. I had changed this sentence already to not use colors because of cultural differences in what colors can mean, and I realize it doesn't sound very clear now.

**Format for readability**

> :   Round to appropriate precision. Showing 1.2M is clearer than 1,234,567.89 for high-level metrics. But show more precision when small changes matter.

Reviewer 2: Suggestion to tie both examples together.

```suggestion
:   Round to the approximate number, but only when appropriate. Showing 1.2M is clearer than 1,234,567.89 for high-level metrics. But show more precision when small changes matter.
```

To add trend indicators to your metric visualization:

1. Create a **Metric** visualization with a numeric primary metric.
2. Add a secondary metric that represents the comparison value.

    ::::{tip}
    Use the `shift` parameter in formulas to compare current values against historical data. For example, if your primary metric is counting orders (based on an `order_id` field) for the current week, you can use the `count(order_id, shift='1w')` formula to compare this week's count of orders to last week's count.
    ::::

3. In the secondary metric configuration, look for the **Color by value** option. The possible choices are:
   * **None**: No trend indicators (default)
   * **Static**: Shows the secondary metric as a badge with a fixed color that you select
   * **Dynamic**: Enables both color coding and directional icons based on the comparison

4. Select **Dynamic** coloring. More options appear.

   ![Dynamic coloring options for secondary metrics](../../images/metric-secondary-dynamic-coloring.png "=70%")

5. Choose a **Color palette** that matches how you'd like to represent the comparison.

6. Configure the **Display** option:

>    * **Icon**: Shows only directional arrows: ↑ for increase, ↓ for decrease, = for no change

Reviewer 2: I noticed that there's EUI [icons](https://eui.elastic.co/docs/components/display/icons/) for the increase and decrease arrows, but they seem to be used for sorting (sortDown and sortUp). Should the EUI icons be used here? 

Unfortunately, I couldn't find an icon for the equal sign (`=`).

>    * **Icon**: Shows only directional arrows: ↑ for increase, ↓ for decrease, = for no change

Reviewer 2: I noticed that there's EUI [icons](https://eui.elastic.co/docs/components/display/icons/) for the increase and decrease arrows, but they seem to be used for sorting (sortDown and sortUp). Should the EUI icons be used here? 

```suggestion
   * **Icon**: Shows only directional arrows: {icon}`sortUp` for increase, {icon}`sortDown` for decrease, = for no change
```

Unfortunately, I couldn't find an icon for the equal sign (`=`).

   * **Value**: Shows only the secondary metric value
   * **Both**: Shows both the icon and value (default)

7. The secondary metric does not automatically compare with the primary metric. Define the value to **Compare to**:
   * **Static value**: Compares against a fixed baseline value that you specify
   * **Primary metric**: Compares the secondary metric directly against the primary metric by displaying the result of `Primary metric - Secondary metric`. This option is only available when the primary metric is numeric. 
   
     When you select this option, the secondary metric is automatically updated:

       * The secondary metric label changes to **Difference**. You can edit this label.
       * If you chose a **Display** option that shows a value, the secondary metric value is automatically updated to show the difference compared to the primary metric.

8. Apply your changes. 

> The metric visualization now shows the secondary metric as a comparison with a trend indicator.

Reviewer 2: For someone with little to no data visualization skills (me), it could be helpful to describe what the end result shows, instead of what the UI displays. For example:

```suggestion
The metric visualization now shows a comparison of the primary and second metrics and trend information. 
```

Reviewer 3: Could expand to:

The metric visualization now shows how the primary and secondary metrics compare, along with a trend indicator that highlights increases or decreases.

Author: - about repeating: This is by design as it's the conclusion/confirmation we've reached the end of the procedure
- about the suggestion: I think the suggestion might imply that there is only 1 metric showing in the chart as a result (the diff) instead of 1 main metric + a secondary metric displayed as a diff. I prefer to keep this as is with a focus on the secondary metric, if that makes sense.

    :::

**Appearance**
:   Define the formatting of the maximum value, including:
    - **Name**: It's a best practice to customize this with a readable title.

### Breakdown settings [breakdown-options]

**Data**
:   Split your metric into multiple tiles based on a categorical field. Each unique value creates its own tile, allowing you to compare metrics across regions, products, time periods, or any other dimensions. You can optionally specify the following options:

    - **Number of values**: The number of tiles to show. If more values are available for the selected breakdown field, an additional tile named **Other** shows if the **Group remaining values as "Other"** advanced option is on.
    - **Rank by**: The dimension by which top values are ranked.
    - **Rank direction**: The direction to use for the ranking.
    - **Collapse by**: Aggregate values of the various tiles into a single number. Possible aggregation options are `None` (default), `Sum`, `Average`, `Min`, and `Max`.

    :::{include} ../../_snippets/lens-breakdown-advanced-settings.md
    :::

**Appearance**
:   Define the formatting of the broken down view of the metric, including:

>     - **Name**: It's a best practice to customize this with a readable title.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - **Name**: It's a best practice to customize this with a meaningful title.
```
